Advent of Code 2024
===================
Is another 25 programming languages even possible? Let's find out. (That said, I'm not sure last year's solving-by-hand counts as a language, and writing programs in a dozen nearly-identical dialects of LISP is hardly evidence of polyglottery!)

Day 01: [ALGOL 68](https://jmvdeer.home.xs4all.nl/en.algol-68-genie.html)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Writing this program is how I realised that I have been mollycoddled by years of short-circuited boolean operations. It's very nice to be able to write `if (p != NULL && p->data) {...}` in C-like languages; but in ALGOL, the construction `IF p ISNT REF NODE(NIL) AND data OF p THEN ... FI` will try to evaluate both sides of the boolean operation, potentially segfault-ing when it attempts `data OF p`. In writing the sorting function for this program, my initial efforts to write quicksort were stymied by my list indices running out of bounds, despite my belief that I was bounds-checking. Eventually, I gave up and just wrote bubblesort, but after completing part 1, tried shellsort instead. It was at this point I realised that ALGOL's `AND` doesn't short circuit, and instead resorted to the somewhat awkwardly-named GNU extension `ANDTH`. Of course, this meant I could go back and fix quicksort, but I've left the shellsort implementation in for reference.

Another little annoyance was that although statements within a block are separated by semicolons (which makes sense in analogy to English grammar), the last statement in a block doesn't require a trailing one (which also makes sense in analogy to English grammar). This means that adding a cheeky debug print statement at the end of a block will make the compiler complain if you don't modify your semicolons accordingly. I suspect this influenced later language design!

I can see similarities between ALGOL and other roughly cotemporaneous languages, like FORTRAN, Pascal and perhaps even BASIC. I've read that C's most direct ancestor is BCPL, which descended from ALGOL 60 (rather than ALGOL 68), but there's certainly a family resemblance.

Strictly speaking, it wasn't necessary to implement a frequency table to solve part 2 of this problem. However, it's (in theory) a little more time efficient, reducing the solution from $O(n^2)$ to $O(n\log n)$-ish (assuming traversal of the frequency table doesn't take $O(n)$ every time). It could be made more efficient with a tree-like structure or hash table instead. I just thought I'd mess around with pointers a little, since I probalby won't ever be coming back to this language.

**ALGOL 68**: the great-uncle of the famous C.

**Syntax Highlight**: `OF` to lookup a field within a structure (or structure reference) -- very English-like!

Day 02: [헐 (Heol)](https://wiki.xxiivv.com/site/heol.html)
-----------------------------------------------------------
This is my third time writing a program for the [Varvara](https://wiki.xxiivv.com/site/varvara.html) virtual machine. (The first two times were in uxntal assembly [2022, Day 6] and UF [2023, Day 16]. Will I have to use the Sunflower BASIC port next time???) The Heol interpreter is very much a built-for-fun (or proof-of-concept) project, and still has a lot of rough edges. The way it utilises the Varvara machine's return stack means that there's a limit to how far recursion can take the program. The stack can contain up to 256 bytes (so 128 addresses); most of my functions go 5 or 6 nested brackets deep, each of which pushes an address to the stack; so even with a little bit of tail optimisation, that's only 25 or so nested function calls. This is fine for some languages, but a bit limiting for a LISP (which will often use recursion to map a function across a list, or fold a list into an accumulator, etc.). I made an attempt to modify the language's source to allow for tail-optimisation of recursive user functions, but didn't get very far. (In retrospect, perhaps I should have modified the language to keep track of return addresses elsewhere in memory, rather than the native uxn return address stack. This approach worked for UF, after all.)

The language also lacks garbage collection, which is a hindrance to getting the entire input into memory. The input contains 6521 integers, each of which costs 4 bytes of memory; and if each one is placed inside a 4-byte cons cell, and those cells are organised inside a thousand-element list (1000 more 4-byte cons cells), that's a total of 56168 bytes (a little more than 85% of the available 65536 bytes of memory). The runtime of ~2222 bytes still fits within the remaining memory, but the program requires making many copies of lists (and once in memory, the lists can't be removed or modified). With garbage collection, each list within the input could be processed one-at-a-time and then discarded; but without garbage collection, it may well be impossible to solve this problem if the input is kept in RAM.

So, I didn't keep in the input in RAM. Instead, I hacked together a bash script to handle input and output (so I guess this is technically a two-language solution). Initially, I wrote an AWK script to change e.g. `1 2 3` to `(solve '(1 2 3))` and piped the entire resulting file into the program. This actually worked for part 1, but the memory issues meant it wouldn't work for part 2. (If the language eventually gets an extended call stack and garbage collection, I might one day return and use this approach.) Instead, the solution I ended up using runs a separate instance of Heol for each line of input, stores the results in 1000 different files, and finally sums them with a line of AWK (`{ p1 += $1; p2 += $2 } END { print p1; print p2 }`). Spawning and running the 1000 processes takes around 30 seconds. (I think that given the language doesn't yet have a way to even read or write external files, this approach is fair enough for now.)

Heol doesn't support macros yet. If it ever does, it'll make setting up keywords like `cond` and `let` much easier.

One logic bug I had to deal with (i.e. not relating to memory or recursion!) was deciding how to modify a list for Part 2 of the problem. Initially I tried removing only the first offending value from the list, but then an input like `46 43 44 43 42` couldn't be solved. (The first `43` should be removed, but my program saw it as a "safe" transition.) I found this bug by modifying my Python solution to compare each of its results to the Heol result (using something like `os.system("echo (safeish? '($vals)) | heol 2>temp.txt")`).

**헐**: don't let your memory limits define you!

**Syntax Highlight**: `eq?` to check equality (not very surprising at first, until you learn you'll need it to equate numbers -- there's no `=` operator)

Day 03: [HolyC](https://holyc-lang.com)
---------------------------------------
The nth "C but better" language I've used. HolyC has some interesting quirks: a string literal on its own is interpreted as a `printf` command (which feels nicer than you'd expect); a `switch` command can be given its argument in square brackets to disable bounds-checking (i.e. no `default` case, and segfault on a case that isn't covered); a `case` can span a range of values; no default `int` type (the signed-ness and width must be specified). These changes from C take advantage of gaps in the language, or slightly improve its efficiency; I can see why its author, Terry Davis, made these changes.

The language is very close to C, and I imagine anyone familiar with C would find it easy to write HolyC (especially now that it has been ported beyond its original environment of TempleOS). The different library bindings might be a minor hiccough. The original intent of the language was to be a hybrid scripting/systems language; HolyC is the language of the TempleOS shell, and programs and functions can be written and called directly from the shell. I'm not convinced of its usefulness for scripting, but writing a program like this one felt just a little nicer than writing in C. (Perhaps I should have delayed using this language for a harder task!)

After initially solving this problem using Python's regex library, I wanted to try a lower-level approach. Hence, a finite-state automaton. (HolyC doesn't have a regex library, but technically I could have used the C Standard Library version.) The language's `FileRead` function is extraordinarily useful for this specific task -- it simply loads the entire contents of a file into memory, as a contiguous range of eight-bit unsigned integers/characters. (This allocates memory which must be `Free`d later.) Then it's just a matter of traversing the data and keeping track of state. (States are stored as multiples of 128 to accomodate table lookups of state + ASCII value. HolyC doesn't appear to have `enum`s, so I've `#define`d the values instead.)

**HolyC**: a little nicer than C.

**Syntax Highlight**: `U0` (i.e. unsigned integer of 0 bits; HolyC's `void` type)
